Add map storage blog for KC19 (#326)
keycloak/keycloak-web: blog/2022/storage-map.adoc

Reference to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/9596[Q&A live document].

CAUTION: This feature has known issues in CockroachDB, see https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/issues/11618[this tracker for list].

### Alternative next step: Persist data in external Infinispan

_Requirements:_ Infinispan 12

If you have a cluster of running Infinispan, you can use it for storing the data as well,
just run the following command:

   bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=hotrod --storage-hotrod-host=<host> --storage-hotrod-port=11222 --storage-hotrod-username=<username> --storage-hotrod-password=<password>

Reference to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/12010[Q&A live document].

=== Next step: Store data in separate storages

Eventually it turns out that some of the data should be stored in files or a database, other
(e.g. session) data should be stored in Infinispan. Can this be achieved?

Yes! Keycloak storage is divided into the following storage areas: Realms,
clients, users, groups, roles, client scopes, authorization services,
events, authentication sessions, user/client sessions, login failures,

> and single-use tokens.

Reviewer: Should we add action-tokens?

Author: yup.

Each area maintains its own storage for storing the data, and each area
is independent of others. In other words, realms can be served by database and
users by Infinispan.

To have all the session data stored in external Infinispan,
and realm / client / user / group / role / ... data stored in a relational database, you
can issue the following command:

>    bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=hotrod \

Reviewer: Should this be `jpa` instead of `hotrod`? 

```suggestion
   bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=jpa \
```

Author: Good catch, thanks!

:title: New storage in Keycloak
:date: 2022-07-27
:publish: true
:author: Hynek Mlnařík

> Store in Keycloak has known limitations:
> For small deployments, it takes too long to initialize the database and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current store in Keycloak has some known limitations. For small deployments, it takes too long to initialize the database and
```

start Keycloak. There is no native support for cloud-native deployment.

> Upgrading to a new Keycloak version often means requirement for stop-the-world

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Upgrading to a new Keycloak version often means a requirement for stop-the-world
```

Author: fixed

updates with little chance for no downtime upon upgrade.

Keycloak 19 brings in an early preview of the future Keycloak store supporting
no-downtime upgrades, per-realm storage, and cloud-nativity from its very inception.

> This so caled _map_ storage stays focused at delivering optimal experience and thus

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This so called _map_ storage stays focused at delivering optimal experience and thus
```

Author: good catch

> limits its support to Postgres and CockroachDB databases and Infinispan datastore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
limits its support to Postgres and CockroachDB databases, and Infinispan datastore.
```

> The early preview is available in Quarkus distribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The early preview is available in the Quarkus distribution.
```

This early preview lacks several features necessary for optimal performance
and is thus not yet production ready; still we have a plan to deliver those:

- In Keycloak 20, expect improved support especially for CockroachDB;
  and also a file-based store. Together with another anticipated feature
  - _tree_ store - it would be possible to combine several storage mechanisms

>   and have e.g. several static client declarations in static files managed

Reviewer 3: I remember that Andrew was always picky to avoid Latin abreviations.

```suggestion
  and have, for example, several static client declarations in static files managed
```

Author: You are correct, yet I will stick with those in the blog post

  in a versioning system like Git, combined with dynamic clients stored in a database.
  Per-request object caching is on radar for Keycloak 20 too and should result in
  significantly better performance.

- In Keycloak 21, expect LDAP support, and an offline tool for migrating
  data from legacy store to new one, and further optimizations and garbage collection

> Note that the store used in previous vesions (now called _legacy store_) does

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the store used in previous versions (now called _legacy store_) does
```

Author: fixed

> _not_ go away! Since the new store is not yet production ready, it remains the default

Reviewer 3: Eventually it will go away ... do you want to be more specific here?

```suggestion
_not_ go away soon! Since the new store is not yet production ready, it remains the default
```

Author: Makes sense, but I don't want to be specific in this blog

store in Keycloak 19. Also other databases (MySQL, MariaDB, MS SQL Server, Oracle) are not

> supported by the new store, these are only supported by the legacy. We do consider

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
supported by the new store in Keycloak 19, these are only supported by the legacy. We do consider
```

Author: will be kept as is

second-level support for these databases, based on results of a community survey.

For development and testing purposes, we offer a fast in-memory store called `chm`.

> This store is intentionally not capable of zero-downtime upgrade as that is not needed

Reviewer 3: (or "not capable of a zero-downtime upgrade")

```suggestion
This store is intentionally not capable of zero-downtime upgrades as that is not needed
```

Author: will keep this as si

> for development. As such, it offers also a quick Keycloak-without-database deployment.

Reviewer 3: (as suggested by Google Docs grammar checker)

```suggestion
for development. As such, it also offers a quick Keycloak-without-database deployment.
```

Author: makes sense

We will be glad to hear your feedback in https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/new?category=keycloak-x-new-store&title=%5BUser%20feedback%5D%20&labels=team/storage-sig[GitHub Discussions].

## Try it out

The following section contains examples of how to configure Keycloak 19
with the new store.

> WARNING: The command line options starting with `--storage` might change

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WARNING: The command line options starting with `--storage` are marked as experimental and might change
```

Author: fixed

         without prior warning, based on the feedback from the community
         and project needs.

### See what Keycloak can do without a database

After downloading, you can try Keycloak in a single-node deployment as simply as running

   bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=chm

> This starts Keycloak instance with a simple testing in-memory store which is persisted

Reviewer 2: Perhaps worth highlighting that it stores in files?

```suggestion
This starts Keycloak instance with a simple testing in-memory store which is saved to the local file system
```

> This starts Keycloak instance with a simple testing in-memory store which is persisted

Reviewer 3: Maybe provide a hint were it is beging saved: in `data/chm`.

> This starts Keycloak instance with a simple testing in-memory store which is persisted

Reviewer 3: Missing article, should be "This starts a Keycloak instance..."

across Keycloak restarts but has no support for zero-downtime upgrades or clustering.

> ### Next step: Persist data in relational database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Next step: Persist data in a relational database
```

_Requirements:_ Postgres 14 or CockroachDB 22.1 (or newer)

To keep the data in a database, run the following command:

   bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=jpa --db-url=<jdbc-url> --db-username=<username> --db-password=<password>

Reference to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/9596[Q&A live document].

CAUTION: This feature has known issues in CockroachDB, see https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/issues/11618[this tracker for list].

### Alternative next step: Persist data in external Infinispan

> _Requirements:_ Infinispan 12 (or newer)

Reviewer: I am not sure we should add the `(or newer)` part. There are two problems:
1. We didn't run any tests with the newer Infinispan
2. Keycloak is currently not able to configure/create caches in newer Infinispan, the problem is that we currently have one big XML file and Infinsipan expects one XML file per cache (maybe it is somehow possible but we didn't investigate yet). On the other hand, I tried to manually create caches in Infinispan and then run Keycloak and it seems to be working. But out of the box, it fails when Keycloak tries to create caches.

Author: fixed in the next commit

> If you have a cluster of running Infinispan, you can use it for storing the data as well,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have Infinispan up and running, you can use it for storing the data as well,
```

> just run the following command:

Reviewer 3: Avoid "just" (as well as "simply") as those the reader's experience might vary.

```suggestion
and run the following command:
```

Author: rephrased

   bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=hotrod --storage-hotrod-host=<host> --storage-hotrod-port=11222 --storage-hotrod-username=<username> --storage-hotrod-password=<password>

Keycloak creates the needed caches in Infinispan upon first start if the caches
do not exist already. You are free to create and configure the caches
yourself if you prefer to fine-tune those or e.g. want to set up persistence.
Refer to Infinispan documentation for available options for cache configuration.

Reference to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/12010[Q&A live document].

=== Next step: Store data in separate storages

Eventually it turns out that some of the data should be stored in files or a database, other
(e.g. session) data should be stored in Infinispan. Can this be achieved?

Yes! Keycloak storage is divided into the following storage areas: Realms,
clients, users, groups, roles, client scopes, authorization services,
events, authentication sessions, user/client sessions, login failures,
action tokens, and single-use tokens (last two areas to be merged in Keycloak 20).

> NOTE: For more details on this division, please see https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-community/blob/main/design/keycloak.x/storage-architecture.md[architecture specification].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: For more details on this division, please see the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-community/blob/main/design/keycloak.x/storage-architecture.md[architecture specification].
```

Author: URLs are withour article

Each area maintains its own storage for storing the data, and each area

> is independent of others. In other words, realms can be served by database and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is independent of others. In other words, realms can be served by a database and
```

> is independent of others. In other words, realms can be served by database and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is independent of the others. In other words, realms can be served by database and
```

Author: this will be kept

users by Infinispan.

> To have all the session data stored in external Infinispan,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To have all the session data stored in an external Infinispan instance,
```

Author: fixed

and realm / client / user / group / role / ... data stored in a relational database, you
can issue the following command:

   bin/kc.sh start-dev --storage=jpa \
     --db-url=<jdbc-url> --db-username=<username> --db-password=<password> \

>      --storage-hotrod-host=<host> --storage-hotrod-port=11222 \

Reviewer: Sorry I missed this before, just a nitpick:
```suggestion
     --storage-hotrod-host=<host> --storage-hotrod-port=<port> \
```

     --storage-hotrod-username=<username> --storage-hotrod-password=<password> \
     --storage-area-action-token=hotrod \
     --storage-area-auth-session=hotrod \
     --storage-area-single-use-object=hotrod \
     --storage-area-user-session=hotrod

> This starts Keycloak server wit all areas being handles by relational database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This starts Keycloak server with all areas being handles by the relational database
```

> This starts Keycloak server wit all areas being handles by relational database

Reviewer 3: Missing article, should be "This starts the Keycloak server..."

Author: +1

> This starts Keycloak server wit all areas being handles by relational database

Reviewer 3: Typo, "handles" should be "handled" IMHO

Author: True!

(`--storage=jpa`) but those listed in specific `--storage-area-...` options which

> are set to use Infinispan Hot Rod protocol. This setup is similar to the legacy store

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are set to use Infinispan. This setup is similar to the legacy store
```

Author: Replaced by "external Infinispan"

> where all the session data are stored in Infinispan.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where all the session data are stored in Infinispan, with the exception that Infinispan is not embedded within Keycloak.
```

> where all the session data are stored in Infinispan.

Reviewer 3: Data is uncountable, there fore "... data is stored ..."

Author: Will kep it as is. Singular "datum", Plural "data".

:title: New storage in Keycloak
:date: 2022-07-28
:publish: true
:author: Hynek Mlnařík

In 2021, Keycloak team started implementing a new storage capable
of upgrading Keycloak without downtime. We are happy to announce that
with Keycloak 19, the preview of this storage is available in two 

> implementations: relational database and Infinispan.

Reviewer 2: There was/is much more reasons for the new store than zero downtime upgrade support.

I'd call it an early preview, rather than a preview. Question is would we want to combine this blog post and the store road-map blog post? That might make sense, as you could relatively easily include in this post what's coming in 20, when it's aimed to be production ready, etc..

The new store supports only Postgres and CockroachDB databases. Legacy
database is still available both with Wildfly and Quarkus distributions,
and will be kept until the new store is production-ready and supports
all first class databases.

In addition to the persistent implementations, there is also an in-memory
implementation of the new store used primarily for development purposes
and incapable of zero-downtime upgradability. This implementation is based

> on Java native `ConcurrentHashMap`, and referred to by an abbreviation `chm`.

Reviewer 2: `ConcurrentHashMap` is that something we plan to keep in the long run?

We will be glad for you to try these feature out and let us know your
feedback in https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/new?category=keycloak-x-new-store&title=%5BUser%20feedback%5D%20&labels=team/storage-sig[GitHub Discussions].

## Overview

This section is an extract of the https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-community/blob/main/design/keycloak.x/storage-architecture.md[architecture specification]. Please follow the link for more details.

> In Keycloak, the following storage areas have been identified: Realms,

Reviewer 4: Missing login failures.

implementations to tailor deployment to best match the target environment.

Since each area is served by a single storage implementation, and the only
available storages are database, external Infinispan, and `chm`, it is not
possible to cache values, hence the performance is far from ideal.
Ability to combine multiple stores in a single area will be delivered
in Keycloak 20.

== Setup Guides

The following section contains examples of how to configure Keycloak 19
with the new store.

WARNING: The command line options starting with `--storage` might change
         without prior warning, based on the feedback from the community
         and project needs.

=== Postgres / CockroachDB

Requirements: Postgres 14 or CockroachDB 22.1 (or newer

Run the following command:

   bin/kc.sh start --storage=jpa --db-url=<jdbc-url> --db-username=<username> --db-password=<password>

Reference to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/discussions/9596[Q&A live document].

CAUTION: This feature has known issues in CockroachDB, see https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/issues/11618[this tracker for list].

=== External Infinispan

> Requirements: Infinispan 13

Reviewer: This is not true. Currently, the HotRod store works only with Infinispan 12. We will work on Infinispan 13/14 soon, but it will require some changes in how we do the configuration.
